\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename hello.info
@settitle Printing a Greeting
@finalout
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@set EDITION 1.03
@set VERSION 1.3
@set UPDATED 22 May 1993

@ifinfo
This file documents the the GNU @code{hello} command for printing a
greeting message.

Copyright (C) 1992, 1993 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GNU Hello
@subtitle The Greeting Printing Program
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for Hello Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author by David MacKenzie and the GNU Hello Development Team

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1992, 1993 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end titlepage

@node Top, , , (dir)

@ifinfo
This file documents the the GNU @code{hello} command to print a
greeting message.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Instructions::	How to read this manual. 
* Copying::		How you can copy and share @code{hello}.
* Overview::		Preliminary information.
* Sample::		Sample output from @code{hello}.
* Invoking hello::	How to run @code{hello}.
* Problems::		Reporting bugs.
* Concept Index::	Index of concepts.
@end menu

@node Instructions, Copying, , Top
@chapter How to Read This Manual

@cindex reading
@cindex manual, how to read
@cindex how to read
To read this manual, begin at the beginning, reading from left to right
and top to bottom, until you get to the end.  Then stop.  You may pause
for a beer anywhere in the middle as well, if you wish.  (Please note,
however, that The King strongly advises against heavy use of
prescription pharmaceuticals, based on his extensive personal and
professional experience.)

@node Copying, Overview, Instructions, Top
@include gpl.texinfo

@node Overview, Sample, Copying, Top
@chapter Overview
@cindex greetings
@cindex overview

The GNU @code{hello} program produces a familiar, friendly greeting.
It allows nonprogrammers to use a classic computer science tool which
would otherwise be unavailable to them.  Because it is protected by the
GNU General Public License, users are free to share and change it.

GNU @code{hello} was written by Mike Haertel, David MacKenzie, @w{Jan
Brittenson}, Charles Hannum, Roland McGrath, Noah Friedman, and @w{The King}.

@node Sample, Invoking hello, Overview, Top
@chapter Sample Output
@cindex sample

Here are some realistic examples of running GNU @code{hello}.

This is the output of the command @samp{hello}:

@example
Hello, world!
@end example

This is the output of the command @samp{hello --help}:

@example
This is GNU Hello, THE greeting printing program.
Usage: hello [-htvm] [--help] [--traditional] [--version] [--mail]
  -h, --help                    Print a summary of the options
  -t, --traditional             Use traditional greeting format
  -v, --version                 Print the version number
  -m, --mail                    Print your mail
@end example

This is the output of the command @samp{hello --traditional}:

@example
hello, world
@end example

@node Invoking hello, Problems, Sample, Top
@chapter Invoking @code{hello}
@cindex invoking
@cindex version
@cindex options
@cindex usage
@cindex help
@cindex getting help

The format for running the @code{hello} program is:

@example
hello @var{option} @dots{}
@end example

@code{hello} supports the following options:

@table @samp
@item --help
@itemx -h
Print an informative help message describing the options and then exit.

@item --version
@itemx -v
Print the version number of @code{hello} on the standard error output
and then exit.

@item --traditional
@itemx -t
@cindex traditional
@cindex modern
Use the traditional greeting message @samp{hello, world} rather 
than the more modern @samp{Hello, world!}.

@item --mail
@itemx -m
@cindex mail
@cindex creeping feature
@cindex feature, creeping
@cindex feeping creature
@cindex creature, feeping
Print your mail on the standard output.
@end table

@node Problems, Concept Index, Invoking hello, Top
@chapter Reporting Bugs
@cindex bugs
@cindex problems

If you find a bug in GNU @code{hello}, please send electronic mail
to @w{@samp{bug-gnu-hello@@prep.ai.mit.edu}}.  Include the version
number, which you can find by running @w{@samp{hello --version}}.  Also
include in your message the output that the program produced and the
output you expected.@refill

If you have other questions, comments or suggestions about GNU
@code{hello}, contact The King via electronic mail to
@w{@samp{elvis@@graceland.gnu.ai.mit.edu}}.  The King will try to help
you out, although he may not have time to fix your problems.

@node Concept Index, , Problems, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@cindex tail recursion
@printindex cp

@shortcontents
@contents
@bye
