This is ../info/emacs, produced by makeinfo version 4.0 from emacs.texi.

   This is the thirteenth edition of the `GNU Emacs Manual', updated
for Emacs version 20.7.

INFO-DIR-SECTION Editors
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Emacs: (emacs).	The extensible self-documenting text editor.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY

   Published by the Free Software Foundation 59 Temple Place, Suite 330
Boston, MA  02111-1307 USA

   Copyright (C) 1985, 1986, 1987, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998,
1999    Free Software Foundation, Inc.

   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
that the sections entitled "The GNU Manifesto", "Distribution" and "GNU
General Public License" are included exactly as in the original, and
provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the
terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that the sections entitled "The GNU Manifesto",
"Distribution" and "GNU General Public License" may be included in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in the
original English.


File: emacs,  Node: Acknowledgments,  Next: Screen,  Prev: Concept Index,  Up: Top

Acknowledgments
***************

   Many people have contributed code included in the Free Software
Foundation's distribution of GNU Emacs.  To show our appreciation for
their public spirit, we list here those who have written substantial
portions.

   * Per Abrahamsen wrote the customization buffer facilities, as well
     as `double.el' for typing accented characters not normally
     available from the keyboard, `xt-mouse.el' which handles mouse
     commands through Xterm, and `cpp.el' which hides or highlights
     parts of C programs according to preprocessor conditionals.

   * Jay K. Adams wrote `jka-compr.el', providing automatic
     decompression and recompression for compressed files.

   * Joe Arceneaux wrote the original text property implementation, and
     implemented support for X11.

   * Boaz Ben-Zvi wrote `profile.el', to time Emacs Lisp functions.

   * Jim Blandy wrote Emacs 19's input system, brought its
     configuration and build process up to the GNU coding standards,
     and contributed to the frame support and multi-face support.

   * Terrence M. Brannon wrote `landmark.el', a neural-network robot
     that learns landmarks.

   * Frank Bresz wrote `diff.el', a program to display `diff' output.

   * Peter Breton implemented `dirtrack' which does better tracking of
     directory changes in shell buffers, `filecache.el' which records
     which directories your files are in, `locate.el' which interfaces
     to the `locate' command, `net-utils.el', and the "generic mode"
     feature.

   * Kevin Broadey wrote `foldout.el', providing folding extensions to
     Emacs's outline modes.

   * Vincent Broman wrote `ada.el', a mode for editing Ada code (since
     replaced by `ada-mode.el').

   * David M. Brown wrote `array.el', for editing arrays and other
     tabular data.

   * Bill Carpenter provided `feedmail.el'.

   * Hans Chalupsky wrote `advice.el', an overloading mechanism for
     Emacs Lisp functions, and `trace.el', a tracing facility for Emacs
     Lisp.

   * Bob Chassell wrote `texnfo-upd.el' and `makeinfo.el', modes and
     utilities for working with Texinfo files.

   * James Clark wrote `sgml-mode.el', a mode for editing SGML
     documents, and contributed to Emacs's dumping procedures.

   * Mike Clarkson wrote `edt.el', an emulation of DEC's EDT editor.

   * Glynn Clements provided `gamegrid.el' and a couple of games that
     use it, Snake and Tetris.

   * Andrew Csillag wrote M4 mode (`m4-mode.el').

   * Doug Cutting and Jamie Zawinski wrote `disass.el', a disassembler
     for compiled Emacs Lisp code.

   * Michael DeCorte wrote `emacs.csh', a C-shell script that starts a
     new Emacs job, or restarts a paused Emacs if one exists.

   * Gary Delp wrote `mailpost.el', an interface between RMAIL and the
     `/usr/uci/post' mailer.

   * Matthieu Devin wrote `delsel.el', a package to make newly-typed
     text replace the current selection.

   * Eric Ding contributed `goto-addr.el',

   * Carsten Dominik wrote `reftex.el', a package for setting up labels
     and cross-references for LaTeX.

   * Scott Draves wrote `tq.el', help functions for maintaining
     transaction queues between Emacs and its subprocesses.

   * Viktor Dukhovni wrote support for dumping under SunOS version 4.

   * John Eaton co-wrote Octave mode (`octave.el' and related files).

   * Rolf Ebert co-wrote Ada mode (`ada-mode.el').

   * Stephen Eglen implemented `mspools.el', for use with Procmail,
     which tells you which mail folders have mail waiting in them, and
     `iswitchb.el', a feature for incremental reading and completion of
     buffer names.

   * Torbjo"rn Einarsson contributed F90 mode (`f90.el').

   * Tsugutomo Enami co-wrote the support for international character
     sets.

   * Hans Henrik Eriksen wrote `simula.el', a mode for editing SIMULA 87
     code.

   * Michael Ernst wrote `reposition.el', a command for recentering a
     function's source code and preceding comment on the screen.

   * Ata Etemadi wrote `cdl.el', functions for working with Common Data
     Language source code.

   * Frederick Farnback implemented `morse.el', which converts text to
     morse code.

   * Fred Fish wrote the support for dumping COFF executable files.

   * Karl Fogel wrote:
        * `bookmark.el', for creating named placeholders, saving them
          and jumping to them later,

        * `mail-hist.el', a history mechanism for outgoing mail
          messages, and

        * `saveplace.el', for preserving point's location in files
          between editing sessions.

   * Gary Foster wrote the emulation for CRiSP: `crisp.el' and
     `scroll-lock.el'.

   * Noah Friedman wrote `rlogin.el', an interface to Rlogin, and
     `type-break.el', which reminds you to take periodic breaks from
     typing.  With Roland McGrath, he wrote `rsz-mini.el', a minor mode
     to automatically resize the minibuffer to fit the text it contains.

   * Keith Gabryelski wrote `hexl.el', a mode for editing binary files.

   * Kevin Gallagher rewrote and enhanced the EDT emulation, and wrote
     `flow-ctrl.el', a package for coping with unsuppressible XON/XOFF
     flow control.

   * Kevin Gallo added multiple-frame support for Windows NT.

   * Howard Gayle wrote:
        * the C and lisp code for display tables and case tables,

        * `rot13.el', a command to display the plaintext form of a
          buffer encoded with the Caesar cipher,

        * much of the support for the ISO-8859 European character set
          (which includes `iso-ascii.el', `iso-insert.el',
          `iso-swed.el', `iso-syntax.el', `iso-transl.el', and
          `swedish.el'), and

        * `vt100-led.el', a package for controlling the LED's on
          VT100-compatible terminals.

   * Stephen Gildea made the Emacs quick reference card.

   * David Gillespie wrote:
        * Emacs 19's Common Lisp compatibility packages, replacing the
          old package by Cesar Augusto Quiroz Gonzalez,

        * `complete.el', a partial completion mechanism, and

        * `edmacro.el', a package for editing keyboard macros.

   * Bob Glickstein contributed the `sregex.el' feature.

   * Boris Goldowsky wrote `avoid.el', a package to keep the mouse
     cursor out of the way of the text cursor; `shadowfile.el', a
     package for keeping identical copies of files in more than one
     place; `enriched.el', a package for saving text properties in
     files; and `facemenu.el', a package for specifying faces.

   * Michelangelo Grigni wrote `ffap.el' which visits a file, taking
     the file name from the buffer.

   * Odd Gripenstam wrote `dcl-mode.el'.

   * Michael Gschwind wrote `iso-cvt.el', a package to convert between
     the ISO 8859-1 character set and the notations for non-`ASCII'
     characters used by TeX and net tradition.

   * Henry Guillaume wrote `find-file.el', a package to visit files
     related to the currently visited file.

   * Doug Gwyn wrote the portable `alloca' implementation.

   * Ken'ichi Handa implemented most of the support for international
     character sets.

   * Chris Hanson wrote `netuname.el', a package to use HP-UX's Remote
     File Access facility from Emacs.

   * K. Shane Hartman wrote:
        * `chistory.el' and `echistory.el', packages for browsing
          command history lists,

        * `electric.el' and `helper.el', providing an alternative
          command loop and appropriate help facilities,

        * `emacsbug.el', a package for reporting Emacs bugs,

        * `picture.el', a mode for editing ASCII pictures, and

        * `view.el', a package for perusing files and buffers without
          editing them.

   * John Heidemann wrote `mouse-copy.el' and `mouse-drag.el', which
     provide alternative mouse-based editing and scrolling features.

   * Markus Heritsch co-wrote Ada mode (`ada-mode.el').

   * Karl Heuer wrote the original blessmail script, implemented the
     `intangible' text property, and rearranged the structure of the
     `Lisp_Object' type to allow for more data bits.

   * Manabu Higashida ported Emacs to the MS-DOS operating system.

   * Anders Holst wrote `hippie-exp.el', a versatile completion and
     expansion package.

   * Kurt Hornik co-wrote Octave mode (`octave.el' and related files).

   * Tom Houlder wrote `mantemp.el', which generates manual C++ template
     instantiations.

   * Lars Ingebrigtsen did a major redesign of the GNUS newsreader.

   * Andrew Innes contributed extensively to the Windows NT support.

   * Kyle Jones wrote `life.el', a package to play Conway's "life" game,
     and `mldrag.el', a package which allows the user to resize windows
     by dragging mode lines and vertical window separators with the
     mouse.

   * Tomoji Kagatani implemented `smtpmail.el', used for sending out
     mail with SMTP.

   * David Kaufman wrote `yow.c', an essential utility program for the
     hopelessly pinheaded.

   * Henry Kautz wrote `bib-mode.el', a mode for maintaining
     bibliography databases compatible with `refer' (the `troff'
     version) and `lookbib', and `refbib.el', a package to convert
     those databases to the format used by the LaTeX text formatting
     package.

   * Howard Kaye wrote `sort.el', commands to sort text in Emacs
     buffers.

   * Michael Kifer wrote `ediff.el', an interactive interface to the
     `diff' and `patch' programs, and Viper, the newest emulation for
     VI.

   * Richard King wrote the first version of `userlock.el' and
     `filelock.c', which provide simple support for multiple users
     editing the same file.

   * Larry K. Kolodney wrote `cvtmail.c', a program to convert the mail
     directories used by Gosling Emacs into RMAIL format.

   * Robert Krawitz wrote the original `xmenu.c', part of Emacs's pop-up
     menu support.

   * Sebastian Kremer wrote Emacs 19's `dired-mode', with contributions
     by Lawrence R. Dodd.

   * Geoff Kuenning wrote Emacs 19's `ispell.el', based on work by Ken
     Stevens and others.

   * David Ka*gedal wrote `tempo.el', providing support for easy
     insertion of boilerplate text and other common constructions.

   * Daniel LaLiberte wrote:
        * `edebug.el', a source-level debugger for Emacs Lisp,

        * `cl-specs.el', specifications to help `edebug' debug code
          written using David Gillespie's Common Lisp support,

        * `cust-print.el', a customizable package for printing lisp
          objects,

        * `eval-reg.el', a re-implementation of `eval-region' in Emacs
          Lisp, and

        * `isearch.el', Emacs 19's incremental search minor mode.

   * James R. Larus wrote `mh-e.el', an interface to the MH mail system.

   * Frederic Lepied contributed `expand.el', which uses the abbrev
     mechanism for inserting programming constructs.

   * Lars Lindberg wrote `msb.el', which provides more flexible menus
     for buffer selection, and rewrote `dabbrev.el'.

   * Eric Ludlam wrote the Speedbar package and `checkdoc.el'.

   * Neil M. Mager wrote `appt.el', functions to notify users of their
     appointments.  It finds appointments recorded in the diary files
     generated by Edward M. Reingold's `calendar' package.

   * Ken Manheimer wrote `allout.el', a mode for manipulating and
     formatting outlines, and `icomplete.el', which provides incremental
     completion feedback in the minibuffer.

   * Bill Mann wrote `perl-mode.el', a mode for editing Perl code.

   * Brian Marick and Daniel LaLiberte wrote `hideif.el', support for
     hiding selected code within C `#ifdef' clauses.

   * Simon Marshall wrote:
        * `fast-lock.el', which caches the face data computed by Font
          Lock mode,

        * `lazy-lock.el', which delays fontification in Font Lock mode
          until text is actually displayed, and

        * `regexp-opt.el', which generates a regular expression from a
          list of strings.

   * Bengt Martensson, Mark Shapiro, Mike Newton, Aaron Larson, and
     Stefan Schoef, wrote `bibtex.el', a mode for editing BibTeX
     bibliography files.

   * Charlie Martin wrote `autoinsert.el', which provides automatic
     mode-sensitive insertion of text into new files.

   * Thomas May wrote `blackbox.el', a version of the traditional
     blackbox game.

   * Roland McGrath wrote:
        * `compile.el', a package for running compilations in a buffer,
          and then visiting the locations reported in error messages,

        * `etags.el', a package for jumping to function definitions and
          searching or replacing in all the files mentioned in a `TAGS'
          file,

        * `find-dired.el', for using `dired' commands on output from the
          `find' program, with Sebastian Kremer,

        * `map-ynp.el', a general purpose boolean question-asker,

        * `autoload.el', providing semi-automatic maintenance of
          autoload files, and

        * `upd-copyr.el', providing semi-automatic maintenance of
          copyright notices in source code.

   * David Megginson wrote `derived.el', which allows one to define new
     major modes by inheriting key bindings and commands from existing
     major modes.

   * Wayne Mesard wrote `hscroll.el' which does horizontal scrolling
     automatically.

   * Richard Mlynarik wrote:
        * `cl-indent.el', a package for indenting Common Lisp code,

        * `ebuff-menu.el', an "electric" browser for buffer listings,

        * `ehelp.el', bindings for browsing help screens,

        * `rfc822.el', a parser for E-mail addresses in the RFC-822
          format, used in mail messages and news articles,

        * `terminal.el', a terminal emulator for Emacs subprocesses, and

        * `yow.el', an essential utility (try `M-x yow').

   * Keith Moore wrote `aixcc.lex', a pre-processor designed to help
     Emacs parse the error messages produced by the AIX C compiler.

   * Erik Naggum wrote the time-conversion functions, and has tested the
     latest source code daily.

   * Thomas Neumann and Eric Raymond wrote `makefile.el', a mode for
     editing makefiles.

   * Jurgen Nickelsen wrote `ws-mode.el', providing WordStar emulation.

   * Jeff Norden wrote `kermit.el', a package to help the Kermit dialup
     communications program run comfortably in an Emacs shell buffer.

   * Andrew Norman wrote `ange-ftp.el', providing transparent FTP
     support.

   * Jeff Peck wrote:
        * `emacstool.c', support for running Emacs under SunView/Sun
          Windows,

        * `sun-curs.el', cursor definitions for Sun Windows, and

        * `sun-fns.el', providing mouse support for Sun Windows.

   * Damon Anton Permezel wrote `hanoi.el', an animated demonstration of
     the "Towers of Hanoi" puzzle.

   * Jens Petersen wrote `find-func.el', which makes it easy to find
     the source code for an Emacs Lisp function or variable.

   * Daniel Pfeiffer wrote:
        * `executable.el'

        * `sh-script.el', a mode for editing shell scripts,

        * `skeleton.el', implementing a concise language for writing
          statement skeletons, and

        * `two-column.el', a minor mode for simultaneous two-column
          editing.

   * Fred Pierresteguy and Paul Reilly made Emacs work with X Toolkit
     widgets.

   * Christian Plaunt wrote `soundex.el', an implementation of the
     Soundex algorithm for comparing English words by their
     pronunciation.

   * Francesco A. Potorti wrote `cmacexp.el', providing a command which
     runs the C preprocessor on a region of a file and displays the
     results.

   * Michael D. Prange and Steven A. Wood wrote `fortran.el', a mode for
     editing FORTRAN code.

   * Ashwin Ram wrote `refer.el', commands to look up references in
     bibliography files by keyword.

   * Eric S. Raymond wrote:
        * `vc.el', an interface to the RCS and SCCS source code version
          control systems, with Paul Eggert,

        * `gud.el', a package for running source-level debuggers like
          GDB and SDB in Emacs,

        * `asm-mode.el', a mode for editing assembly language code,

        * `cookie1.el', support for "fortune-cookie" programs like
          `yow.el' and `spook.el',

        * `finder.el', a package for finding Emacs Lisp packages by
          keyword and topic,

        * `lisp-mnt.el', functions for working with the special headers
          used in Emacs Lisp library files, and

        * code to set and make use of the `load-history' lisp variable,
          which records the source file from which each lisp function
          loaded into Emacs came.

   * Edward M. Reingold wrote the extensive calendar and diary support
     (try `M-x calendar'), with contributions from Stewart Clamen, Paul
     Eggert, and Lara Rios.  Andy Oram contributed to its documentation.
     Reingold has also contributed to `tex-mode.el', a mode for editing
     TeX files, as have William F. Schelter, Dick King, Stephen Gildea,
     Michael Prange, and Jacob Gore.

   * Rob Riepel contributed `tpu-edt.el' and its associated files,
     providing an emulation of the VMS TPU text editor emulating the
     VMS EDT editor, and `vt-control.el', providing some control
     functions for the DEC VT line of terminals.

   * Roland B. Roberts contributed much of the VMS support distributed
     with Emacs 19, along with Joseph M. Kelsey, and `vms-pmail.el',
     support for using Emacs within VMS MAIL.

   * John Robinson wrote `bg-mouse.el', support for the mouse on the BBN
     Bitgraph terminal.

   * Danny Roozendaal implemented `handwrite.el', which converts text
     into "handwriting."

   * William Rosenblatt wrote `float.el', implementing a floating-point
     numeric type using Lisp cons cells and integers.

   * Guillermo J. Rozas wrote `scheme.el', a mode for editing Scheme
     code, and `fakemail.c', an interface to the System V mailer.

   * Ivar Rummelhoff provided `winner.el', which records recent window
     configurations so you can move back to them.

   * Wolfgang Rupprecht contributed Emacs 19's floating-point support
     (including `float-sup.el' and `floatfns.c'), and `sup-mouse.el',
     support for the Supdup mouse on lisp machines.

   * James B. Salem and Brewster Kahle wrote `completion.el', providing
     dynamic word completion.

   * Masahiko Sato wrote `vip.el', an emulation of the VI editor.

   * William Schelter wrote `telnet.el', support for `telnet' sessions
     within Emacs.

   * Ralph Schleicher contributed `battery.el', a package for displaying
     laptop computer battery status, and `info-look.el', a package for
     looking up Info documentation for symbols in the buffer.

   * Gregor Schmid wrote `tcl.el', a mode for editing Tcl/Tk scripts.

   * Michael Schmidt and Tom Perrine wrote `modula2.el', a mode for
     editing Modula-2 code, based on work by Mick Jordan and Peter
     Robinson.

   * Ronald S. Schnell wrote `dunnet.el', a text adventure game.

   * Philippe Schnoebelen wrote `gomoku.el', a Go Moku game played
     against Emacs, and `mpuz.el', a multiplication puzzle.

   * Randal Schwartz wrote `pp.el', a pretty-printer for lisp objects.

   * Manuel Serrano contributed the Flyspell package that does spell
     checking as you type.

   * Stanislav Shalunov wrote `uce.el', for responding to unsolicited
     commercial email.

   * Richard Sharman contributed `hilit-chg.el', which uses colors to
     inclidate recent editing changes.

   * Olin Shivers wrote:
        * `comint.el', a library for modes running interactive
          command-line- oriented subprocesses,

        * `cmuscheme.el', for running inferior Scheme processes,

        * `inf-lisp.el', for running inferior Lisp process, and

        * `shell.el', for running inferior shells.

   * Sam Shteingold wrote `gulp.el'.

   * Espen Skoglund wrote `pascal.el', a mode for editing Pascal code.

   * Rick Sladkey wrote `backquote.el', a lisp macro for creating
     mostly-constant data.

   * Lynn Slater wrote `help-macro.el', a macro for writing interactive
     help for key bindings.

   * Chris Smith wrote `icon.el', a mode for editing Icon code.

   * David Smith wrote `ielm.el', a mode for interacting with the Emacs
     Lisp interpreter as a subprocess.

   * Paul D. Smith wrote `snmp-mode.el'.

   * William Sommerfeld wrote `scribe.el', a mode for editing Scribe
     files, and `server.el', a package allowing programs to send files
     to an extant Emacs job to be edited.

   * Michael Staats wrote `pc-select.el', which rebinds keys for
     selecting regions to follow many other systems.

   * Ake Stenhoff and Lars Lindberg wrote `imenu.el', a framework for
     browsing indices made from buffer contents.

   * Peter Stephenson contributed `vcursor.el', which implements a
     "virtual cursor" that you can move with the keyboard and use for
     copying text.

   * Sam Steingold wrote `midnight.el'.

   * Jonathan Stigelman wrote `hilit19.el', a package providing
     automatic highlighting in source code buffers, mail readers, and
     other contexts.

   * Steve Strassman did not write `spook.el', and even if he did, he
     really didn't mean for you to use it in an anarchistic way.

   * Jens T. Berger Thielemann wrote `word-help.el', which is part of
     the basis for `info-look.el'.

   * Spencer Thomas wrote the original `dabbrev.el', providing a command
     which completes the partial word before point, based on other
     nearby words for which it is a prefix.  He also wrote the original
     dumping support.

   * Jim Thompson wrote `ps-print.el', which converts Emacs text to
     Postscript.

   * Masanobu Umeda wrote:
        * GNUS, a featureful reader for Usenet news,

        * `prolog.el', a mode for editing Prolog code,

        * `rmailsort.el', a package for sorting messages in RMAIL
          folders,

        * `metamail.el', an interface to the Metamail program,

        * `tcp.el', emulation of the `open-network-stream' function for
          some Emacs configurations which lack it, and

        * `timezone.el', providing functions for dealing with time
          zones.

   * Neil W. Van Dyke wrote `webjump.el', a "hot links" package.

   * Ulrik Vieth implemented `meta-mode.el', for editing MetaFont code.

   * Geoffrey Voelker wrote the Windows NT support.

   * Johan Vromans wrote `forms.el' and its associated files, defining a
     mode for filling in forms, and `iso-acc.el', a minor mode providing
     electric accent keys for text using the ISO-8859 character set.

   * Barry Warsaw wrote:
        * `assoc.el', a set of utility functions for working with
          association lists,

        * `cc-mode.el', a major mode for editing C and C++ code, based
          on earlier work by Dave Detlefs, Stewart Clamen, and Richard
          Stallman,

        * `elp.el', a new profiler for Emacs Lisp programs.

        * `man.el', a mode for reading UNIX manual pages,

        * `regi.el', providing an AWK-like control structure for use in
          lisp programs, and

        * `reporter.el', providing customizable bug reporting for lisp
          packages.

        * `supercite.el', a minor mode for quoting sections of mail
          messages and news articles,

   * Morten Welinder wrote:
        * `desktop.el', facilities for saving some of Emacs's state
          between sessions,

        * `s-region.el', commands for setting the region using the
          shift key and motion commands, and

        * `dos-fns.el', functions for use under MS-DOS.

     He also helped port Emacs to MS-DOS.

   * Joseph Brian Wells wrote:
        * `apropos.el', a command to find commands, functions, and
          variables whose names contain matches for a regular
          expression,

        * `resume.el', support for processing command-line arguments
          after resuming a suspended Emacs job, and

        * `mail-extr.el', a package for extracting names and addresses
          from mail headers, with contributions from Jamie Zawinski.

   * Rodney Whitby and Reto Zimmermann wrote `vhdl-mode.el'.

   * Ed Wilkinson wrote `b2m.c', a program to convert mail files from
     RMAIL format to Unix `mbox' format.

   * Mike Williams wrote `mouse-sel.el', providing enhanced mouse
     selection, and `thingatpt.el', a library of functions for finding
     the "thing" (word, line, s-expression) containing point.

   * Dale R. Worley wrote `emerge.el', a package for interactively
     merging two versions of a file.

   * Tom Wurgler wrote `emacs-lock.el', which makes it harder to exit
     with valuable buffers unsaved.

   * Eli Zaretskii made many standard Emacs features work on MS-DOS.

   * Jamie Zawinski wrote:
        * Emacs 19's optimizing byte compiler, with Hallvard Furuseth,

        * much of the support for faces and X selections,

        * `mailabbrev.el', a package providing automatic expansion of
          mail aliases, and

        * `tar-mode.el', providing simple viewing and editing commands
          for tar files.

   * Ian T. Zimmerman wrote `gametree.el'.

   * Neal Ziring and Felix S. T. Wu wrote `vi.el', an emulation of the
     VI text editor.

   Others too numerous to mention have reported and fixed bugs, and
added features to many parts of Emacs.  We thank them for their
generosity as well.

   This list intended to mention every contributor of a major package or
feature we currently distribute; if you know of someone we have omitted,
please report that as a manual bug.

