This is ../info/mh-e, produced by makeinfo version 4.0 from mh-e.texi.

INFO-DIR-SECTION Editors
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* MH-E: (mh-e).		Emacs interface to the MH mail system.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY

   This is Edition 1.2, last updated 22 August 1995, of `mh-e, The
Emacs Interface to MH', for mh-e, Version 5.0.2.

   Copyright 1995 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

   Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also
that the section entitled "Copying" is included exactly as in the
original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

   Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.


File: mh-e,  Node: Top,  Next: Preface,  Prev: (dir),  Up: (dir)

MH and Emacs
************

   This is Edition 1.2 of `mh-e, The Emacs Interface to MH', last
updated 22 August 1995 for mh-e Version 5.0.2.

* Menu:

* Preface::                     Introduction to mh-e.
* Tour Through mh-e::           Use mh-e quickly!
* Using mh-e::                  Documentation for all commands.
* Customizing mh-e::            Documentation for all variables.
* Odds and Ends::               Getting mh-e, reporting bugs, mailing
                                list and FAQ.
* History::                     The authors speak up!
* Changes to mh-e::             Actual changes between Versions 3 and beyond.
* Copying::                     The GNU General Public License
* Command Index::
* Variable Index::
* Concept Index::


File: mh-e,  Node: Preface,  Next: Tour Through mh-e,  Prev: Top,  Up: Top

Preface
*******

   These chapters introduce another interface to MH that is accessible
through the GNU Emacs editor, namely, _mh-e_.  mh-e is easy to use.  I
don't assume that you know GNU Emacs or even MH at this point, since I
didn't know either of them when I discovered mh-e.  However, mh-e was
the tip of the iceberg, and I discovered more and more niceties about
GNU Emacs and MH.  Now I'm fully hooked on both of them.

   The mh-e package is distributed with GNU Emacs, (1) so you shouldn't
have to do anything special to use it.  But it's important to note a
brief history of mh-e.  Version 3 was prevalent through the Emacs 18
and early Emacs 19 years.  Then Version 4 came out (Emacs 19.23), which
introduced several new and changed commands.  Finally, Version 5.0 was
released, which fixed some bugs and incompatibilities.  This is the
version covered by this manual.  *Note Getting Started:: will help you
decide which version you have.

   If you don't already use GNU Emacs but want to learn more, you can
read an online tutorial by starting GNU Emacs and typing `C-h t'
(`help-with-tutorial').  (This notation is described in *Note
Conventions::.)  If you want to take the plunge, consult the *Note GNU
Emacs Manual: (emacs)top, from the Free Software Foundation.

   If more information is needed, you can go to the Unix manual pages of
the individual MH commands.  When the name is not obvious, I'll guide
you to a relevant MH manual page that describes the action more fully.

   I hope you enjoy these chapters!  If you have any comments, or
suggestions for this document, please let me know.

Bill Wohler <wohler@newt.com>
8 February 1995

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) Note that mh-e is supported with MH 6 and either Emacs 18 or
Emacs 19.  Reportedly, large parts of it work with MH 5 and also with
Lucid/XEmacs and Epoch, but there are no guarantees.  It is also
distributed with Lucid/XEmacs, as well as with MH itself.


File: mh-e,  Node: Tour Through mh-e,  Next: Using mh-e,  Prev: Preface,  Up: Top

Tour Through mh-e
*****************

   This chapter introduces some of the terms you'll need to know and
then takes you on a tour of mh-e. (1)  When you're done, you'll be able
to send, read, and file mail, which is all that a lot of people ever
do.  But if you're the curious type, you'll read *Note Using mh-e:: to
be able to use all the features of mh-e.  If you're the adventurous
type, you'll read *Note Customizing mh-e:: to make mh-e do what you
want.  I suggest you read this chapter first to get the big picture,
and then you can read the other two as you wish.

* Menu:

* Conventions::                 GNU Emacs Terms and Conventions
* Getting Started::
* Sending Mail Tour::
* Reading Mail Tour::
* Processing Mail Tour::
* Leaving mh-e::
* More About mh-e::

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) The keys mentioned in these chapters refer to the default key
bindings.  If you've changed the bindings, refer to the command
summaries at the beginning of each major section in *Note Using mh-e::,
for a mapping between default key bindings and function names.


File: mh-e,  Node: Conventions,  Next: Getting Started,  Prev: Tour Through mh-e,  Up: Tour Through mh-e

GNU Emacs Terms and Conventions
===============================

   If you're an experienced Emacs user, you can skip the following
conventions and definition of terms and go directly to *Note Getting
Started:: below.  The conventions are as follows:

`C-x'
     Hold down the <CTRL> (Control) key and press the `x' key.

`M-x'
     Hold down the <META> or <ALT> key and press the `x' key.

     Since some keyboards don't have a <META> key, you can generate
     `M-x', for example, by pressing <ESC> (Escape), _releasing it_, (1)
     and then pressing the `x' key.

`RET'
     Press the <RETURN> or <ENTER> key.  This is normally used to
     complete a command.

`SPC'
     Press the space bar.

`TAB'
     Press the <TAB> key.

`DEL'
     Press the <DELETE> key.  This may also be a Backspace key,
     depending on your keyboard or Emacs configuration.

   A "prefix argument" allows you to pass an argument to any Emacs
function.  To pass an argument, type `C-u' before the Emacs command or
keystroke.  Numeric arguments can be passed as well.  For example, to
insert five f's, use `C-u 5 f'.  There is a default of four when using
`C-u', and you can use multiple prefix arguments to provide arguments
of powers of four.  To continue our example, you could insert four f's
with `C-u f', 16 f's with `C-u C-u f', 64 f's with `C-u C-u C-u f', and
so on.  Numeric and valueless negative arguments can also be inserted
with the <META> key.  Examples include `M-5' to specify an argument of
5, or `M--' which specifies a negative argument with no particular
value.



                                *NOTE*

     The prefix `C-u' or `M-' is not necessary in mh-e's MH-Folder
     modes (*note Reading Mail Tour::).  In these modes, simply enter
     the numerical argument before entering the command.

   There are several other terms that are used in Emacs that you should
know.  The "point" is where the cursor currently is.  You can save your
current place in the file by setting a "mark".  This operation is
useful in several ways.  The mark can be later used when defining a
"region", which is the text between the point and mark.  Many commands
operate on regions, such as those for deleting text or filling
paragraphs.  A mark can be set with `C-@' (or `C-SPC').

   The "minibuffer" is the bottom line of the Emacs window, where all
prompting and multiple-character input is directed.  If you are prompted
for information in the minibuffer, such as a filename, Emacs can help
you complete your answer if you type <SPC> or <TAB>.  A second <SPC> or
<TAB> will list all possibilities at that point.  The minibuffer is
also where you enter Emacs function names after typing `M-x'.  For
example, in the first paragraph, I mentioned that you could obtain help
with `C-h t' (`help-with-tutorial').  What this means is that you can
get a tutorial by typing either `C-h t' or `M-x help-with-tutorial'.
In the latter case, you are prompted for `help-with-tutorial' in the
minibuffer after typing `M-x'.

   In case of trouble: Emacs can be interrupted at any time with `C-g'.
For example, if you've started a command that requests that you enter
something in the minibuffer, but then you change your mind, type `C-g'
and you'll be back where you started.  If you want to exit Emacs
entirely, use `C-x C-c'.

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) This is emphasized because pressing ESC twice or holding it down
a second too long so that it repeats gives you an error message.


File: mh-e,  Node: Getting Started,  Next: Sending Mail Tour,  Prev: Conventions,  Up: Tour Through mh-e

Getting Started
===============

   Because there are many old versions of mh-e out there, it is
important to know which version you have.  I'll be talking about
Version 5 which is similar to Version 4 and vastly different from
Version 3.

   First, enter `M-x load-library <RET> mh-e <RET>'. (1)  The message,
`Loading mh-e...done', should be displayed in the minibuffer.  If you
get `Cannot open load file: mh-e', then your Emacs is very badly
configured, or mh-e is missing.  You may wish to have your system
administrator install a new Emacs or at least the latest mh-e files.

   Having loaded mh-e successfully, enter `M-x mh-version <RET>'.  The
version of mh-e should be displayed.  Hopefully it says that you're
running Version 5.0.2 which is the latest version as of this printing.
If instead Emacs beeps and says `[No match]', then you're running an
old version of mh-e.

   If these tests reveal a non-existent or old version of mh-e, please
consider obtaining a new version.  You can have your system
administrator upgrade the system-wide version, or you can install your
own personal version.  It's really quite easy; instructions for getting
and installing mh-e are in *Note Getting mh-e::.  In the meantime, see
*Note Changes to mh-e::, which compares the old and new names of
commands, functions, variables, and buffers.

   Also, older versions of mh-e assumed that you had already set up
your MH environment.  Newer versions set up a new MH environment for
you by running `install-mh' and notifying you of this fact with the
message in a temporary buffer:

     I'm going to create the standard MH path for you.

   Therefore, if you've never run MH before and you're using an old
version of mh-e, you need to run `install-mh' from the shell before you
continue the tour.  If you don't, you'll be greeted with the error
message: `Can't find MH profile'.

   If, during the tour described in this chapter, you see a message
like: `Searching for program: no such file or directory,
/usr/local/bin/mhpath', it means that the MH programs and files are kept
in a nonstandard directory.  In this case, simply add the following to
`~/.emacs' and restart `emacs'.

     (setq mh-progs "/PATH/TO/MH/BINARY/DIRECTORY/")
     (setq mh-lib "/PATH/TO/MH/LIBRARY/DIRECTORY/")

   The `~' notation used by `~/.emacs' above represents your home
directory.  This is used by the `bash' and `csh' shells.  If your shell
does not support this feature, you could use the environment variable
`$HOME' (such as `$HOME/.emacs') or the absolute path (as in
`/home/wohler/.emacs') instead.

   At this point, you should see something like the screen in the
figure in *Note Reading Mail Tour::.  We're now ready to move on.

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) You wouldn't ordinarily do this.


File: mh-e,  Node: Sending Mail Tour,  Next: Reading Mail Tour,  Prev: Getting Started,  Up: Tour Through mh-e

Sending Mail
============

   Let's start our tour by sending ourselves a message which we can
later read and process.  Enter `M-x mh-smail' to invoke the mh-e program
to send messages.  You will be prompted in the minibuffer by `To:'.
Enter your login name.  The next prompt is `cc:'.  Hit <RET> to
indicate that no carbon copies are to be sent.  At the `Subject:'
prompt, enter `Test' or anything else that comes to mind.

   Once you've specified the recipients and subject, your message
appears in an Emacs buffer whose mode (1) is MH-Letter.  Enter some
text in the body of the message, using normal Emacs commands.  You
should now have something like this: (2)







     -----Emacs: *scratch*         (Lisp Interaction)--All---------------------
     To: wohler
     cc:
     Subject: Test
     --------
       This is a test message to get the wheels churning...#
     
     
     --**-{draft}      (MH-Letter)--All----------------------------------------
     mh-e message composition window

   Note the line of dashes that separates the header and the body of the
message.  It is essential that these dashes (or a blank line) are
present or the body of your message will be considered to be part of
the header.

   There are several commands specific to MH-Letter mode, but at this
time we'll only use `C-c C-c' to send your message.  Type `C-c C-c'
now.  That's all there is to it!

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) A "mode" changes Emacs to make it easier to edit a particular
type of text.

   (2) If you're running Emacs under the X Window System, then you
would also see a menubar.  I've left out the menubar in all of the
example screens.


File: mh-e,  Node: Reading Mail Tour,  Next: Processing Mail Tour,  Prev: Sending Mail Tour,  Up: Tour Through mh-e

Receiving Mail
==============

   To read the mail you've just sent yourself, enter `M-x mh-rmail'.
This incorporates the new mail and put the output from `inc' (called
"scan lines" after the MH program `scan' which prints a one-line
summary of each message) into a buffer called `+inbox' whose major mode
is MH-Folder.



                                *NOTE*

     The `M-x mh-rmail' command will show you only new mail, not old
     mail.  If you were to run this tour again, you would use `M-r' to
     pull all your messages into mh-e.

   You should see the scan line for your message, and perhaps others.
Use `n' or `p' to move the cursor to your test message and type <RET>
to read your message.  You should see something like:

        3  24Aug  root       received fax files on Wed Aug 24 11:00:13 PDT 1994
     #  4+ 24Aug  To:wohler  Test<<This is a test message to get the wheels chu
     
     --%%-{+inbox} 4 msgs (1-4)      (MH-Folder Show)--Bot---------------------
     To: wohler
     Subject: Test
     Date: Wed, 24 Aug 1994 13:01:13 -0700
     From: Bill Wohler <wohler@newt.com>
     
       This is a test message to get the wheels churning...
     
     
     
     
     
     -----{show-+inbox} 4      (MH-Show)--Bot----------------------------------
     After incorporating new messages

   If you typed a long message, you can view subsequent pages with <SPC>
and previous pages with <DEL>.


File: mh-e,  Node: Processing Mail Tour,  Next: Leaving mh-e,  Prev: Reading Mail Tour,  Up: Tour Through mh-e

Processing Mail
===============

   The first thing we want to do is reply to the message that we sent
ourselves.  Ensure that the cursor is still on the same line as your
test message and type `r'.  You are prompted in the minibuffer with
`Reply to whom:'.  Here mh-e is asking whether you'd like to reply to
the original sender only, to the sender and primary recipients, or to
the sender and all recipients.  If you simply hit <RET>, you'll reply
only to the sender.  Hit <RET> now.

   You'll find yourself in an Emacs buffer similar to that when you were
sending the original message, like this:

     To: wohler
     Subject: Re: Test
     In-reply-to: Bill Wohler's message of Wed, 24 Aug 1994 13:01:13 -0700
                  <199408242001.NAA00505@newt.com>
     --------
     #
     
     --**-{draft}      (MH-Letter)--All----------------------------------------
     To: wohler
     Subject: Test
     Date: Wed, 24 Aug 1994 13:01:13 -0700
     From: Bill Wohler <wohler@newt.com>
     
       This is a test message to get the wheels churning...
     
     -----{show-+inbox} 4      (MH-Show)--Bot----------------------------------
     Composing a reply...done
     Composition window during reply

   By default, MH will not add you to the address list of your replies,
so if you find that the `To:' header field is missing, don't worry.  In
this case, type `C-c C-f C-t' to create and go to the `To:' field,
where you can type your login name again.  You can move around with the
arrow keys or with `C-p' (`previous-line'), `C-n' (`next-line'), `C-b'
(`backward-char'), and `C-f' (`forward-char') and can delete the
previous character with <DEL>.  When you're finished editing your
message, send it with `C-c C-c' as before.

   You'll often want to save messages that were sent to you in an
organized fashion.  This is done with "folders".  You can use folders
to keep messages from your friends, or messages related to a particular
topic.  With your cursor in the MH-Folder buffer and positioned on the
message you sent to yourself, type `o' to output (`refile' in MH
parlance) that message to a folder.  Enter `test' at the `Destination:'
prompt and type `y' (or <SPC>) when mh-e asks to create the folder
`+test'.  Note that a `^' (caret) appears next to the message number,
which means that the message has been marked for refiling but has not
yet been refiled.  We'll talk about how the refile is actually carried
out in a moment.

   Your previous reply is now waiting in the system mailbox.  You
incorporate this mail into your MH-Folder buffer named `+inbox' with
the `i' command.  Do this now.  After the mail is incorporated, use `n'
or `p' to move the cursor to the new message, and read it with <RET>.
Let's delete this message by typing `d'.  Note that a `D' appears next
to the message number.  This means that the message is marked for
deletion but is not yet deleted.  To perform the deletion (and the
refile we did previously), use the `x' command.

   If you want to send another message you can use `m' instead of `M-x
mh-smail'.  So go ahead, send some mail to your friends!


File: mh-e,  Node: Leaving mh-e,  Next: More About mh-e,  Prev: Processing Mail Tour,  Up: Tour Through mh-e

Leaving mh-e
============

   You may now wish to exit `emacs' entirely.  Use `C-x C-c' to exit
`emacs'.  If you exited without running `x' in the `+inbox' buffer,
Emacs will offer to save it for you.  Type `y' or <SPC> to save
`+inbox' changes, which means to perform any refiles and deletes that
you did there.

   If you don't want to leave Emacs, you can type `q' to bury (hide)
the mh-e folder or delete them entirely with `C-x k'.  You can then
later recall them with `C-x b' or `M-x mh-rmail'.


File: mh-e,  Node: More About mh-e,  Prev: Leaving mh-e,  Up: Tour Through mh-e

More About mh-e
===============

   These are the basic commands to get you going, but there are plenty
more.  If you think that mh-e is for you, read *Note Using mh-e:: and
*Note Customizing mh-e:: to find out how you can:

   * Print your messages.  (*Note Printing:: and *Note Customizing
     Printing::.)

   * Edit messages and include your signature.  (*Note Draft Editing::
     and *Note Customizing Draft Editing::.)

   * Forward messages.  (*Note Forwarding:: and *Note Customizing
     Forwarding::.)

   * Read digests.  (*Note Viewing::.)

   * Edit bounced messages.  (*Note Old Drafts:: and *Note Customizing
     Old Drafts::.)

   * Send multimedia messages.  (*Note Editing MIME:: and *Note
     Customizing Editing MIME::.)

   * Process mail that was sent with `shar' or `uuencode'.  (*Note
     Files and Pipes::.)

   * Use sequences conveniently.  (*Note Sequences::.)

   * Show header fields in different fonts.  (*Note Customizing
     Viewing::.)

   * Find previously refiled messages.  (*Note Searching::.)

   * Place messages in a file.  (*Note Files and Pipes::.)

   Remember that you can also use MH commands when you're not running
mh-e (and when you are!).


File: mh-e,  Node: Using mh-e,  Next: Customizing mh-e,  Prev: Tour Through mh-e,  Up: Top

Using mh-e
**********

   This chapter leaves the tutorial style and goes into more detail
about every mh-e command.  The default, or "out of the box," behavior is
documented.  If this is not to your liking (for instance, you print with
something other than `lpr)', see the associated section in *Note
Customizing mh-e:: which is organized exactly like this chapter.

   There are many commands, but don't get intimidated.  There are
command summaries at the beginning of each section.  In case you have
or would like to rebind the keys, the command summaries also list the
associated Emacs Lisp function.  Furthermore, even if you're stranded
on a desert island with a laptop and are without your manuals, you can
get a summary of all these commands with GNU Emacs online help: use
`C-h m' (`describe-mode') for a brief summary of commands or `C-h i' to
read this manual via Info.  The online help is quite good; try running
`C-h C-h C-h'.  This brings up a list of available help topics, one of
which displays the documentation for a given key (like `C-h k C-n').
In addition, review *Note Conventions::, if any of the GNU Emacs
conventions are strange to you.

   Let's get started!

* Menu:

* Reading Mail::
* Sending Mail::
* Draft Editing::
* Moving Mail::
* Searching::
* Sequences::
* Miscellaneous::


File: mh-e,  Node: Reading Mail,  Next: Sending Mail,  Prev: Using mh-e,  Up: Using mh-e

Reading Your Mail
=================

   The mh-e entry point for reading mail is `M-x mh-rmail'.  This
command incorporates your mail and creates a buffer called `+inbox' in
MH-Folder mode.  The `M-x mh-rmail' command shows you only new mail,
not old mail. (1)  The `+inbox' buffer contains "scan lines", which are
one-line summaries of each incorporated message.  You can perform most
MH commands on these messages via one-letter commands discussed in this
chapter.  See `scan'(1) for a description of the contents of the scan
lines, and see the Figure in *Note Reading Mail Tour::, for an example.

`RET'
     Display a message (`mh-show').

`SPC'
     Go to next page in message (`mh-page-msg').

`DEL'
     Go to previous page in message (`mh-previous-page').

`, (comma)'
     Display a message with all header fields (`mh-header-display').

`M-SPC'
     Go to next message in digest (`mh-page-digest').

`M-DEL'
     Go to previous message in digest (`mh-page-digest-backwards').

`M-b'
     Break up digest into separate messages (`mh-burst-digest').

`n'
     Display next message (`mh-next-undeleted-msg').

`p'
     Display previous message (`mh-previous-undeleted-msg').

`g'
     Go to a message (`mh-goto-msg').

`M-<'
     Go to first message (`mh-first-msg').

`M->'
     Go to last message (`mh-last-msg').

`t'
     Toggle between MH-Folder and MH-Folder Show modes
     (`mh-toggle-showing').

* Menu:

* Viewing::
* Moving Around::

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) If you want to see your old mail as well, use `M-r' to pull all
your messages into mh-e.  Or, give a prefix argument to `mh-rmail' so
it will prompt you for folder to visit like `M-f' (for example, `C-u
M-x mh-rmail <RET> bob <RET>').  Both `M-r' and `M-f' are described in
*Note Organizing::.


File: mh-e,  Node: Viewing,  Next: Moving Around,  Prev: Reading Mail,  Up: Reading Mail

Viewing Your Mail
-----------------

   The `RET' (`mh-show') command displays the message that the cursor
is on.  If the message is already displayed, it scrolls to the
beginning of the message.  Use <SPC> (`mh-page-msg') and <DEL>
(`mh-previous-page') to move forwards and backwards one page at a time
through the message.  You can give either of these commands a prefix
argument that specifies the number of lines to scroll (such as `10
SPC').  mh-e normally hides a lot of the superfluous header fields that
mailers add to a message, but if you wish to see all of them, use the
`,' (comma; `mh-header-display') command.

* Menu:

* Reading Digests::
* Reading MIME::


File: mh-e,  Node: Reading Digests,  Next: Reading MIME,  Prev: Viewing,  Up: Viewing

Reading Digests
...............

   A digest is a message that contains other messages.  Special mh-e
commands let you read digests conveniently.  You can use <SPC> and
<DEL> to page through the digest as if it were a normal message, but if
you wish to skip to the next message in the digest, use `M-SPC'
(`mh-page-digest').  To return to a previous message, use `M-DEL'
(`mh-page-digest-backwards').

   Another handy command is `M-b' (`mh-burst-digest').  This command
uses the MH command `burst' to break out each message in the digest
into its own message.  Using this command, you can quickly delete
unwanted messages, like this: Once the digest is split up, toggle out
of MH-Folder Show mode with `t' (*note Moving Around::) so that the
scan lines fill the screen and messages aren't displayed.  Then use `d'
(*note Deleting::) to quickly delete messages that you don't want to
read (based on the `Subject:' header field).  You can also burst the
digest to reply directly to the people who posted the messages in the
digest.  One problem you may encounter is that the `From:' header
fields are preceded with a `>' so that your reply can't create the
`To:' field correctly.  In this case, you must correct the `To:' field
yourself.  This is described later in *Note Editing Textual::.


File: mh-e,  Node: Reading MIME,  Prev: Reading Digests,  Up: Viewing

Reading Multimedia Mail
.......................

   MH has the ability to read "MIME" (Multipurpose Internet Mail
Extensions) messages.  Unfortunately, mh-e does not yet have this
ability, so you have to use the MH commands `show' or `mhn' from the
shell to read MIME messages.  (1)

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) You can call them directly from Emacs if you're running the X
Window System: type `M-!  xterm -e mhn MESSAGE-NUMBER'.  You can leave
out the `xterm -e' if you use `mhn -list' or `mhn -store'.


File: mh-e,  Node: Moving Around,  Prev: Viewing,  Up: Reading Mail

Moving Around
-------------

   To move on to the next message, use the `n'
(`mh-next-undeleted-msg') command; use the `p'
(`mh-previous-undeleted-msg') command to read the previous message.
Both of these commands can be given a prefix argument to specify how
many messages to skip (for example, `5 n').  You can also move to a
specific message with `g' (`mh-goto-msg').  You can enter the message
number either before or after typing `g'.  In the latter case, Emacs
prompts you.  Finally, you can go to the first or last message with
`M-<' (`mh-first-msg') and `M->' (`mh-last-msg') respectively.

   You can also use the Emacs commands `C-p' (`previous-line') and
`C-n' (`next-line') to move up and down the scan lines in the MH-Folder
window.  These commands can be used in conjunction with `RET' to look
at deleted or refiled messages.

   The command `t' (`mh-toggle-showing') switches between MH-Folder
mode and MH-Folder Show mode.  (1) MH-Folder mode turns off the
associated show buffer so that you can perform operations on the
messages quickly without reading them.  This is an excellent way to
prune out your junk mail or to refile a group of messages to another
folder for later examination.

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) For you Emacs wizards, this is implemented as an Emacs minor
mode.


File: mh-e,  Node: Sending Mail,  Next: Draft Editing,  Prev: Reading Mail,  Up: Using mh-e

Sending Mail
============

   You can send a mail message in several ways.  You can call `M-x
mh-smail' directly, or from the command line like this:

     % emacs -f mh-smail

   From within mh-e's MH-Folder mode, other methods of sending mail are
available as well:

`m'
     Compose a message (`mh-send').

`r'
     Reply to a message (`mh-reply').

`f'
     Forward message(s) (`mh-forward').

`M-d'
     Redistribute a message (`mh-redistribute').

`M-e'
     Edit a message that was bounced by mailer
     (`mh-extract-rejected-mail').

`M-a'
     Edit a message to send it again (`mh-edit-again').

   From within a MH-Folder buffer, you can simply use the command `m'
(`mh-send').  However you invoke `mh-send', you are prompted for the
`To:', `cc:', and `Subject:' header fields.  Once you've specified the
recipients and subject, your message appears in an Emacs buffer whose
mode is MH-Letter (see the Figure in *Note Sending Mail:: to see what
the buffer looks like).  MH-Letter mode allows you to edit your
message, to check the validity of the recipients, to insert other
messages into your message, and to send the message.  We'll go more
into depth about editing a "draft" (1) (a message you're composing) in
just a moment.

   `mh-smail' always creates a two-window layout with the current
buffer on top and the draft on the bottom.  If you would rather preserve
the window layout, use `M-x mh-smail-other-window'.

* Menu:

* Replying::
* Forwarding::
* Redistributing::
* Old Drafts::

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) I highly recommend that you use a "draft folder" so that you can
edit several drafts in parallel.  To do so, create a folder (e.g.,
`+drafts'), and add a profile component called `Draft-Folder:' which
contains `+drafts' (see `mh-profile'(5)).


File: mh-e,  Node: Replying,  Next: Forwarding,  Prev: Sending Mail,  Up: Sending Mail

Replying to Mail
----------------

   To compose a reply to a message, use the `r' (`mh-reply') command.
If you supply a prefix argument (as in `C-u r'), the message you are
replying to is inserted in your reply after having first been run
through `mhl' with the format file `mhl.reply'.  See `mhl'(1) to see
how you can modify the default `mhl.reply' file.

   When you reply to a message, you are first prompted with `Reply to
whom?'.  You have several choices here.

     Response     Reply Goes To
     
     from         The person who sent the message.  This is the default,
                  so <RET> is sufficient.
     
     to           Replies to the sender, plus all recipients in the
                  `To:' header field.
     
     all
     cc           Forms a reply to the sender, plus all recipients.

   Depending on your answer, `repl' is given a different argument to
form your reply.  Specifically, a choice of `from' or none at all runs
`repl -nocc all', and a choice of `to' runs `repl -cc to'.  Finally,
either `cc' or `all' runs `repl -cc all -nocc me'.

   Two windows are then created.  One window contains the message to
which you are replying.  Your draft, in MH-Letter mode (described in
*Note Draft Editing::), is in the other window.

   If you wish to customize the header or other parts of the reply
draft, please see `repl'(1) and `mh-format'(5).


File: mh-e,  Node: Forwarding,  Next: Redistributing,  Prev: Replying,  Up: Sending Mail

Forwarding Mail
---------------

   To forward a message, use the `f' (`mh-forward') command.  You are
given a draft to edit that looks like it would if you had run the MH
command `forw'.  You are given a chance to add some text (see *Note
Draft Editing::).

   You can forward several messages by using a prefix argument; in this
case, you are prompted for the name of a "sequence", a symbolic name
that represents a list or range of message numbers (for example, `C-u f
forbob <RET>').  All of the messages in the sequence are inserted into
your draft.  By the way, although sequences are often mentioned in this
chapter, you don't have to worry about them for now; the full
description of sequences in mh-e is at the end in *Note Sequences::.
To learn more about sequences in general, please see `mh-sequence'(5).


File: mh-e,  Node: Redistributing,  Next: Old Drafts,  Prev: Forwarding,  Up: Sending Mail

Redistributing Your Mail
------------------------

   The command `M-d' (`mh-redistribute') is similar in function to
forwarding mail, but it does not allow you to edit the message, nor does
it add your name to the `From:' header field.  It appears to the
recipient as if the message had come from the original sender.  For more
information on redistributing messages, see `dist'(1).  Also
investigate the `M-a' (`mh-edit-again') command in *Note Old Drafts::,
for another way to redistribute messages.


File: mh-e,  Node: Old Drafts,  Prev: Redistributing,  Up: Sending Mail

Editing Old Drafts and Bounced Messages
---------------------------------------

   If you don't complete a draft for one reason or another, and if the
draft buffer is no longer available, you can pick your draft up again
with `M-a' (`mh-edit-again').  If you don't use a draft folder, your
last `draft' file will be used.  If you use draft folders, you'll need
to visit the draft folder with `M-f drafts <RET>', use `n' to move to
the appropriate message, and then use `M-a' to prepare the message for
editing.

   The `M-a' command can also be used to take messages that were sent
to you and to send them to more people.

   Don't use `M-a' to re-edit a message from a Mailer-Daemon who
complained that your mail wasn't posted for some reason or another.  In
this case, use `M-e' (`mh-extract-rejected-mail') to prepare the
message for editing by removing the Mailer-Daemon envelope and unneeded
header fields.  Fix whatever addressing problem you had, and send the
message again with `C-c C-c'.


File: mh-e,  Node: Draft Editing,  Next: Moving Mail,  Prev: Sending Mail,  Up: Using mh-e

Editing a Draft
===============

   When you edit a message that you want to send (called a "draft" in
this case), the mode used is MH-Letter.  This mode provides several
commands in addition to the normal Emacs editing commands to help you
edit your draft.

`C-c C-y'
     Insert contents of message to which you're replying
     (`mh-yank-cur-msg').

`C-c C-i'
     Insert a message from a folder (`mh-insert-letter').

`C-c C-f C-t'
     Move to `To:' header field (`mh-to-field').

`C-c C-f C-c'
     Move to `cc:' header field (`mh-to-field').

`C-c C-f C-s'
     Move to `Subject:' header field (`mh-to-field').

`C-c C-f C-f'
     Move to `From:' header field (`mh-to-field').

`C-c C-f C-b'
     Move to `Bcc:' header field (`mh-to-field').

`C-c C-f C-f'
     Move to `Fcc:' header field (`mh-to-fcc').

`C-c C-f C-d'
     Move to `Dcc:' header field (`mh-to-field').

`C-c C-w'
     Display expanded recipient list (`mh-check-whom').

`C-c C-s'
     Insert signature in message (`mh-insert-signature').

`C-c C-m C-f'
     Include forwarded message (MIME) (`mh-mhn-compose-forw').

`C-c C-m C-e'
     Include anonymous ftp reference (MIME) (`mh-mhn-compose-anon-ftp').

`C-c C-m C-t'
     Include anonymous ftp reference to compressed tar file (MIME)
     (`mh-mhn-compose-external-compressed-tar').

`C-c C-m C-i'
     Include binary, image, sound, etc. (MIME)
     (`mh-mhn-compose-insertion').

`C-c C-e'
     Run through `mhn' before sending (`mh-edit-mhn').

`C-c C-m C-u'
     Undo effects of `mhn' (`mh-revert-mhn-edit').

`C-c C-c'
     Save draft and send message (`mh-send-letter').

`C-c C-q'
     Quit editing and delete draft message (`mh-fully-kill-draft').

* Menu:

* Editing Textual::
* Editing MIME::
* Sending Message::
* Killing Draft::


File: mh-e,  Node: Editing Textual,  Next: Editing MIME,  Prev: Draft Editing,  Up: Draft Editing

Editing Textual Messages
------------------------

   The following sections show you how to edit a draft.  The commands
described here are also applicable to messages that have multimedia
components.

* Menu:

* Inserting Letter::
* Inserting Messages::
* Header::
* Recipients::
* Signature::


File: mh-e,  Node: Inserting Letter,  Next: Inserting Messages,  Prev: Editing Textual,  Up: Editing Textual

Inserting letter to which you're replying
.........................................

   It is often useful to insert a snippet of text from a letter that
someone mailed to provide some context for your reply.  The command
`C-c C-y' (`mh-yank-cur-msg') does this by yanking a portion of text
from the message to which you're replying and inserting `> ' before
each line.

   You can control how much text is included when you run this command.
If you run this command right away, without entering the buffer
containing the message to you, this command will yank the entire
message, as is, into your reply. (1) If you enter the buffer containing
the message sent to you and move the cursor to a certain point and
return to your reply and run `C-c C-y', then the text yanked will range
from that point to the end of the message.  Finally, the most common
action you'll perform is to enter the message sent to you, move the
cursor to the beginning of a paragraph or phrase, set the "mark" with
`C-SPC' or `C-@', and move the cursor to the end of the paragraph or
phrase.  The cursor position is called the "point", and the space
between the mark and point is called the "region".  Having done that,
`C-c C-y' will insert the region you selected.

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) If you'd rather have the header cleaned up, use `C-u r' instead
of `r' when replying (see *Note Replying::).


File: mh-e,  Node: Inserting Messages,  Next: Header,  Prev: Inserting Letter,  Up: Editing Textual

Inserting messages
..................

   Messages can be inserted with `C-c C-i' (`mh-insert-letter').  This
command prompts you for the folder and message number and inserts the
message, indented by `> '.  Certain undesirable header fields are
removed before insertion.  If given a prefix argument (like `C-u C-c
C-i'), the header is left intact, the message is not indented, and `> '
is not inserted before each line.


File: mh-e,  Node: Header,  Next: Recipients,  Prev: Inserting Messages,  Up: Editing Textual

Editing the header
..................

   Because the header is part of the message, you can edit the header
fields as you wish.  However, several convenience functions exist to
help you create and edit them.  For example, the command `C-c C-f C-t'
(`mh-to-field'; alternatively, `C-c C-f t') moves the cursor to the
`To:' header field, creating it if necessary.  The functions to move to
the `cc:', `Subject:', `From:', `Bcc:', and `Dcc:' header fields are
similar.

   One function behaves differently from the others, namely, `C-c C-f
C-f' (`mh-to-fcc'; alternatively, `C-c C-f f').  This function will
prompt you for the folder name in which to file a copy of the draft.

   Be sure to leave a row of dashes or a blank line between the header
and the body of the message.


File: mh-e,  Node: Recipients,  Next: Signature,  Prev: Header,  Up: Editing Textual

Checking recipients
...................

   The `C-c C-w' (`mh-check-whom') command expands aliases so you can
check the actual address(es) in the alias.  A new buffer is created
with the output of `whom'.


File: mh-e,  Node: Signature,  Prev: Recipients,  Up: Editing Textual

Inserting your signature
........................

   You can insert your signature at the current cursor location with the
`C-c C-s' (`mh-insert-signature') command.  The text of your signature
is taken from the file `~/.signature'.


File: mh-e,  Node: Editing MIME,  Next: Sending Message,  Prev: Editing Textual,  Up: Draft Editing

Editing Multimedia Messages
---------------------------

   mh-e has the capability to create multimedia messages.  It uses the
MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) protocol.  The MIME
protocol allows you to incorporate images, sound, video, binary files,
and even commands that fetch a file with `ftp' when your recipient
reads the message!  If you were to create a multimedia message with
plain MH commands, you would use `mhn'.  Indeed, the mh-e MIME commands
merely insert `mhn' directives which are later expanded by `mhn'.

   Each of the mh-e commands for editing multimedia messages or for
incorporating multimedia objects is prefixed with `C-c C-m' .

   Several MIME objects are defined.  They are called "content types".
The table in *Note Customizing Draft Editing:: contains a list of the
content types that mh-e currently knows about.  Several of the mh-e
commands fill in the content type for you, whereas others require you to
enter one.  Most of the time, it should be obvious which one to use
(e.g., use `image/jpeg' to include a JPEG image).  If not, you can
refer to RFC 1521, (1) which defines the MIME protocol, for a list of
valid content types.

   You are also sometimes asked for a "content description".  This is
simply an optional brief phrase, in your own words, that describes the
object.  If you don't care to enter a content description, just press
return and none will be included; however, a reader may skip over
multimedia fields unless the content description is compelling.

   Remember: you can always add `mhn' directives by hand.

* Menu:

* Forwarding MIME::
* FTP::
* Tar::
* Other MIME Objects::
* Sending MIME::

   ---------- Footnotes ----------

   (1) This RFC (Request For Comments) is available via the URL
`ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc1521.txt'.


File: mh-e,  Node: Forwarding MIME,  Next: FTP,  Prev: Editing MIME,  Up: Editing MIME

Forwarding multimedia messages
..............................

   Mail may be forwarded with MIME using the command `C-c C-m C-f'
(`mh-mhn-compose-forw').  You are prompted for a content description,
the name of the folder in which the messages to forward are located,
and the messages' numbers.


File: mh-e,  Node: FTP,  Next: Tar,  Prev: Forwarding MIME,  Up: Editing MIME

Including an ftp reference
..........................

   You can even have your message initiate an `ftp' transfer when the
recipient reads the message.  To do this, use the `C-c C-m C-e'
(`mh-mhn-compose-anon-ftp') command.  You are prompted for the remote
host and pathname, the content type, and the content description.


File: mh-e,  Node: Tar,  Next: Other MIME Objects,  Prev: FTP,  Up: Editing MIME

Including tar files
...................

   If the remote file (*note FTP::) is a compressed tar file, you can
use `C-c C-m C-t' (`mh-mhn-compose-external-compressed-tar').  Then, in
addition to retrieving the file via anonymous _ftp_, the file will also
be uncompressed and untarred.  You are prompted for the remote host and
pathname and the content description.  The pathname should contain at
least one `/' (slash), because the pathname is broken up into directory
and name components.


File: mh-e,  Node: Other MIME Objects,  Next: Sending MIME,  Prev: Tar,  Up: Editing MIME

Including other multimedia objects
..................................

   Images, sound, and video can be inserted in your message with the
`C-c C-m C-i' (`mh-mhn-compose-insertion') command.  You are prompted
for the filename containing the object, the content type, and a content
description of the object.


File: mh-e,  Node: Sending MIME,  Prev: Other MIME Objects,  Up: Editing MIME

Readying multimedia messages for sending
........................................

   When you are finished editing a MIME message, it might look like
this:

        3  24Aug  root               received fax files on Wed Aug 24 11:00:13
        4+ 24Aug  To:wohler          Test<<This is a test message to get the wh
     
     
     
     
     
     --%%-{+inbox} 4 msgs (1-4)      (MH-Folder Show)--Bot-------------------
     To: wohler
     cc:
     Subject: Test of MIME
     --------
     #@application/octet-stream [Nonexistent ftp test file] \
     access-type=anon-ftp; site=berzerk.com; name=panacea.tar.gz; \
     directory="/pub/"
     #audio/basic [Test sound bite] /tmp/noise.au
     --**-{draft}      (MH-Letter)--All--------------------------------------
     mh-e MIME draft

   The lines added by the previous commands are `mhn' directives and
need to be converted to MIME directives before sending.  This is
accomplished by the command `C-c C-e' (`mh-edit-mhn'), which runs `mhn'
on the message.  The following screen shows what those commands look
like in full MIME format.  You can see why mail user agents are usually
built to hide these details from the user.

     To: wohler
     cc:
     Subject: Test of MIME
     MIME-Version: 1.0
     Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="----- =_aaaaaaaaaa0"
     Content-ID: <1623.777796162.0@newt.com>
     
     ------- =_aaaaaaaaaa0
     Content-Type: message/external-body; access-type="anon-ftp";
             site="berzerk.com"; name="panacea.tar.gz"; directory="/pub/"
     
     Content-Type: application/octet-stream
     Content-ID: <1623.777796162.1@newt.com>
     Content-Description: Nonexistent ftp test file
     
     ------- =_aaaaaaaaaa0
     Content-Type: audio/basic
     Content-ID: <1623.777796162.2@newt.com>
     Content-Description: Test sound bite
     Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64
     
     Q3JlYXRpdmUgVm9pY2UgRmlsZRoaAAoBKREBQh8AgwCAgH9/f35+fn59fX5+fn5+f39/f39/f3
     f4B/f39/f39/f39/f39/f39+f39+f39/f39/f4B/f39/fn5/f39/f3+Af39/f39/gH9/f39/fn
     -----{draft}      (MH-Letter)--Top--------------------------------------
     mh-e MIME draft ready to send

   This action can be undone by running `C-c C-m C-u'
(`mh-revert-mhn-edit').  It does this by reverting to a backup file.
You are prompted to confirm this action, but you can avoid the
confirmation by adding an argument (for example, `C-u C-c C-m C-u').


File: mh-e,  Node: Sending Message,  Next: Killing Draft,  Prev: Editing MIME,  Up: Draft Editing

Sending a Message
-----------------

   When you are all through editing a message, you send it with the
`C-c C-c' (`mh-send-letter') command.  You can give an argument (as in
`C-u C-c C-c') to monitor the first stage of the delivery.


File: mh-e,  Node: Killing Draft,  Prev: Sending Message,  Up: Draft Editing

Killing the Draft
-----------------

   If for some reason you are not happy with the draft, you can kill it
instead with `C-c C-q' (`mh-fully-kill-draft').  Emacs then kills the
draft buffer and deletes the draft message.


File: mh-e,  Node: Moving Mail,  Next: Searching,  Prev: Draft Editing,  Up: Using mh-e

Moving Your Mail Around
=======================

   This section covers how messages and folders can be moved about or
manipulated.  Messages may be incorporated into your `+inbox', deleted,
and refiled.  Messages containing `shar' or `uuencode' output can be
stored.  Folders can be visited, sorted, packed, or deleted.  Here's a
list of the available commands to do these things:

`i'
     Incorporate new mail into folder (`mh-inc-folder').

`d'
     Delete message (`mh-delete-msg').

`C-d'
     Delete message, don't move to next message
     (`mh-delete-msg-no-motion').

`M-s'
     Find messages that meet search criteria (`mh-search-folder').

`o'
     Output (refile) message to folder (`mh-refile-msg').

`c'
     Copy message to folder (`mh-copy-msg').

`C-o'
     Output (write) message to file (`mh-write-msg-to-file').

`!'
     Repeat last output command (`mh-refile-or-write-again').

`l'
     Print message with `lpr' (`mh-print-msg').

`|'
     Pipe message through shell command (`mh-pipe-msg').

`M-n'
     Unpack message created with `uudecode' or `shar' (`mh-store-msg').

`M-l'
     List all folders (`mh-list-folders').

`M-f'
     Visit folder (`mh-visit-folder').

`M-r'
     Regenerate scan lines (`mh-rescan-folder').

`M-x mh-sort-folder'
     Sort folder.

`M-p'
     Pack folder (`mh-pack-folder').

`M-k'
     Remove folder (`mh-kill-folder').

`x'
     Execute pending refiles and deletes (`mh-execute-commands').

`u'
     Undo pending refile or delete (`mh-undo').

`M-u'
     Undo all pending refiles and deletes (`mh-undo-folder').

`q'
     Quit (`mh-quit').

* Menu:

* Incorporating::
* Deleting::
* Organizing::
* Printing::
* Files and Pipes::
* Finishing Up::


File: mh-e,  Node: Incorporating,  Next: Deleting,  Prev: Moving Mail,  Up: Moving Mail

Incorporating Your Mail
-----------------------

   If at any time you receive new mail, incorporate the new mail into
your `+inbox' buffer with `i' (`mh-inc-folder').  Note that `i' will
display the `+inbox' buffer, even if there isn't any new mail.  You can
incorporate mail from any file into the current folder by specifying a
prefix argument; you'll be prompted for the name of the file to use
(for example, `C-u i ~/mbox <RET>').

   Emacs can notify you when you have new mail by displaying `Mail' in
the mode line.  To enable this behavior, and to have a clock in the mode
line besides, add the following to `~/.emacs':

     (display-time)


File: mh-e,  Node: Deleting,  Next: Organizing,  Prev: Incorporating,  Up: Moving Mail

Deleting Your Mail
------------------

   To mark a message for deletion, use the `d' (`mh-delete-msg')
command.  A `D' is placed by the message in the scan window, and the
next message is displayed.  If the previous command had been `p', then
the next message displayed is the message previous to the message just
deleted.  If you specify a prefix argument, you will be prompted for a
sequence (*note Sequences::) to delete (for example, `C-u d frombob
RET').  The `x' command actually carries out the deletion (*note
Finishing Up::).  `C-d' (`mh-delete-msg-no-motion') marks the message
for deletion but leaves the cursor at the current message in case you
wish to perform other operations on the message.

