		 Emacs for Windows NT and Windows 95

This directory contains support for compiling and running GNU Emacs on
Windows NT and Windows 95.  This port supports all of the major
functionality of the Unix version, including subprocesses, windowing
features (fonts, colors, scroll bars, multiple frames, etc.), and
networking support.

Precompiled distributions are also available; ftp to

	ftp://ftp.cs.washington.edu/pub/ntemacs/latest

for the latest precompiled distributions.

* Preliminaries

To compile Emacs, you will need a Microsoft C compiler package.  For
NT, this can be any of the SDK compilers from NT 3.1 and up, Microsoft
Visual C++ for NT (versions 1.0 and up), or Microsoft Visual C++
(versions 2.0 and up).  For Windows 95, this can be Microsoft Visual
C++ versions 2.0 and up.

* Building and installing

See the INSTALL file in this directory for detailed instructions on
building and installing Emacs on your system.

* Further information

If you have access to the World Wide Web, I would recommend pointing
your favorite web browser to the document (if you haven't already):

	http://www.cs.washington.edu/homes/voelker/ntemacs.html

This web document serves as a FAQ and a source for further information
about the port and related software packages.

There is also a mailing list for discussing issues related to this
port of Emacs.  For information about the list, send a message to
ntemacs-users-request@cs.washington.edu with the word "info" in the
*body* of the message.  To subscribe to the list, send a message to
the same address with the word "subscribe" in the body of the message;
similarly, to unsubscribe from the list, send a message with the word
"unsubscribe" in the message body.

You are also always welcome to send me mail directly.  If you don't
hear from me immediately, however, don't worry; it sometimes takes me
a few days (or longer) to get to all of my mail regarding Emacs.

* Reporting bugs

If you encounter bugs in this port of Emacs, first check the FAQ on
the web page above to see if the bug is already known and if there are
any workarounds.  If not, then I would like to hear about it; either
send a bug report to the mailing list, or to me directly (I would
recommend sending to the list first).

Enjoy.

-geoff
(voelker@cs.washington.edu)
